
Are animals conscious? 


This might seem like an obvious question but I think the answer isn't so clear. What does it take to be conscious? Perhaps one thinks that it obvious that animals are concious and it is in no need of an argument. However the answer to this isn't so clear. 

Neuroscientists point to a phenomenon of blindsight. Blindsight is a phenomenon of people who are cortically blind, that is, they cannot see objects conciously, but they can nevertheless catch balls that are tossed at them. 

What this means is that consciousness is NOT a neccesary condition for a complex interaction with the world, and catching a ball requires a surprising amount of accuracy. 

It is intuitively obvious to most people that complexity is not a sufficient condition for conciousness. 

http://faculty.philosophy.umd.edu/pcarruthers/Books-2.htm
http://faculty.philosophy.umd.edu/pcarruthers/Blurb-AI.htm

https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/724048.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A269f38ea5b7dafe0f6795bc69d642a1d

zCF46PwNswmQfZzSzS

One common argument that is made at vegans is that it is okay to eat animals because they are not conscious. 

Peter Carruthers’ argument that animals experience pain, but not *consciously*?



Carruthers references the phenomenon of blindsight, wherein person with no conscious awareness of (say) one hemisphere of their vision can nonetheless do things like catch a tossed ball. 

This shows that consciousness is not NECESSARY for complex interactions with the world.

A root may be able to go around objects and overcome great obstacles, in one sense it senses the obstacle and takes another route, this seems very similar to me the behavior of animals "sensory experience". Just an endless environment-reaction chain.

It's clear to me that something like an instinct, that isn't universal but particular, is in all living things (including plants). Less clear is what an instinct actually is. It seems like some people take instinct to be cognition.

A plant appears to make choices based on environment variables. However, there is no indication that the plant is aware of any of the choices.

The blindsight example is sometimes deployed to argue against free will. All it shows, however, is that the sphere of human freedom extends beyond consciousness.

Or put otherwise, Descartes and modernity we’re wrong to identity the person with the thinking I. That is, the ancients and medievals were right (again) and the moderns wrong (again).

I’m not sure why—other than supreme arrogance and narcissism—anyone thought the modern project of tearing down all received wisdom and starting from scratch would result in more improvements than errors.