Why do people eat meat? 

Do people eat meat because of the taste? Though I suspect many people do consiously believe they eat meat because they enjoy the taste, evolutionary reasoning actually works backwards: They like the taste because they meat. In other words, the argument should not be taken at face value, people are comfortable eating meat but the reason they eat meat is not it's taste. For instance when the first humans started eating meat, it is likely they did not have the neccesary genetic make-up to enjoy it's taste, nevertheless those groups that did eat meat survived better and overtime developed the taste buds. 

So notice what is happening here, a group does something even if it goes against their taste buds, in other words, they put up with it, and overtime this either turns out to have been a good choice or not. This is in contrast to somebody merely satisfying their desires, indeed merely satisfying ones desires implies the lack of change. To repeat, if an organism attempts simply to satisfy it's existing desires and not to stick to things that go against its desires, by definition the organism can only evolve through one avenue, natural selection among desires. 

This kind of prescription seems to me to be animal like, advocating that humans should refuse non to evolve in a non-desire dimension just seems to be exactly anti-human. Humanity is about cultural evolution, it is about norms that overule our desire. From the evolutionary point of view this allows for quicker adaptation, but from a christian point of view this explains the culture of helping the needy. It refuses to allow for natural selection among desires but insists on cultural selection. 

This is a more general problem with utilitarianism, it insists that our preferences must be met, it denies the very human stuborness which is the cause of much of our adaptation. 

This is not to say that taste plays no role. Indeed once we have this evolutionary reasoning clear in our heads we can interpret taste as an attractor, that is, to make experimenting more likely to lead to a meat diet. As such taste can play an important role for habit formation, an invaluable role for new generations.

Suppose there exists an agent who only changes his behavior if he can find reasons to change behavior. For instance suppose that there are green frogs and red frogs, the red frogs are poison but not the green frogs. This might naturally create an instinct of disgust when seeing red frogs, which might partly carry over to green frogs. Depending on the environment the fine tuning of the disgust instinct may change, for instance if the only thing that can be eaten is green frogs then more evolution will take place to fine tune the instinct to discriminate, but if there are 

In other words, somebody who reasons about his ethics by definition can't learn about ethics empirically. They can only learn how best to achieve their existing ethics. 

Imagine that there is a brain that ignores culture and always aims to deduce what it should do. 

The evolutionary view put the weight on unconcious learning. Indeed an organism that did overrule it's instincts or who reasoned its behavior would not be able to evolve. 

 that concious learning is less important than unconcious learning. 

 In other words agent's are not optimizing creatures, they just have a set of habits, there is no sense in speaking of constraints. 

Is this obvious truth, that people have habits and don't analyze their actions and simply do things, a deathblow to philosophers trying to analyze them? A philosopher may be interested in two distinct things, trying to explain the behavior of the the agents, and trying to convince the agents to change their mind. 

If the goal of the philosopher is simply to explain the behavior, he is in fact indifferent to how the agent's decide, instead he is interested in studying their behavior and will simply try to re-formulate his theory to say that agents are acting AS IF they maximize their pleasure. This approach is most interesting for those who with a scientific inclination, it can be used to try and predict the behavior. 

If on the other hand the philosopher is interested in changing the agents mind, then he will try to stop the agent from doing thing unconsiously. This may provoke anger or dismissable from the agent, understandably, a bit like socrates who was known for being really annoying by trying to have people articulate everything. Of course this may be a more dangerous exercise than it seems because making an agent less reliant on one habit may make them doubt their other habits. Of course philosophers may think this is a desirable state of affairs to the desirable, but they are open to Chesterton's fence criticism. 

But let's play the philosophers game and assume for a moment that people are eating meat because they are maximizing some underlying variable. What is their goal if it is not taste? What else can be the optimand of people? Perhaps people are trying simply to optimize their pleasure, but that would simply result in a similar argument to the "taste" argument. Perhaps they are trying to lead a good life, in which case the vegetarian would have to appeal defining the "good life", something many vegetarians don't wish to do because it makes retaining a subjectivist position difficult. If they are willing to empbrace non-subjectivist positions then they would have to fall to objective standards. Nevertheless the most likely turn of vegetarians after reflecting is to use happiness as the standard. 

In other words, the vegetarians will simply try to use the utilitarian standard and attempt to convert meat-eaters to adopt this standard.